Add documentation of configuration schema (#111)
openSUSE/qem-bot: doc/config.md

# Configuration format of qem-bot

> Configuration,in another way also called metadata of qem-bot is hold in yaml files with one file per "product". Plus there is one special config file called `singlearch.yml` which contains list of packages that exist only on single architecture. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configuration, in another way also called metadata of qem-bot, is hold in yaml files with one file per "product". Additionally, there is one special config file called `singlearch.yml` which contains a list of packages that exist only on single architecture.
```

Example of `singlearch.yaml`:

```yaml
- packageone
- packagetwo
- onlyppcle
```

> If incident has package from this list, job is automaticaly marked as without **aggregate**. With this incident can be approved without existing aggregate jobs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If an incident has a package from this list, a job is automatically marked as without **aggregate**. That means the incident can be approved without existing aggregate jobs.
```

> Rest yaml files contains definition of **product** and data either or both **aggregate** and **incidents**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The other yaml files contain the definition of **product** and data either or both **aggregate** and **incidents**
```
or
```suggestion
The other yaml files contain definitions of **product** and data either or both **aggregate** and **incidents**
```
or something else? I don't really understand this sentence. Especially the last part.

> ## Structure of product definition

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Structure of a product definition
```

Example:

```yaml
product: leap155
settings:
  DISTRI: opensuse
  VERSION: '15.5'
  SOMETHING: 'something123'
  ELSE: 'ELSE123'
```

* `product` - mandatory and must be unique, no other config file can have same product. 

> * `settings` - mandatory dictionary containing `key` : `value` which are used directly in job schedule. From this pairs are `DISTRI` and `VERSION` mandatory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `settings` - mandatory dictionary containing `key` : `value` which are used directly in job schedule. From this the pairs `DISTRI` and `VERSION` are mandatory.
```

## Aggregate part of config

> Used for schedule multiple Incidents in product as one BUILD named **YYYYMMDD-{counter from 1}**. Jobs scheduled on this part of config will have multiple vars `*_TEST_REPO`  used add Incidents to test. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Used to schedule multiple Incidents in a product as one BUILD named **YYYYMMDD-{counter from 1}**. Jobs scheduled on this part of the config will have multiple vars `*_TEST_REPO`  used to add Incidents to test. 
```

Example:

```yaml
 aggregate:
  FLAVOR: Shiny-New-Flavour
  archs:
    - aarch64
    - s390x
  test_issues:
    BASE_TEST_ISSUES: Basesystem:17-SP5
    OS_TEST_ISSUES: Product-Linux:17-SP5
    SERVERAPP_TEST_ISSUES: Module-Server-Applications:17-SP5
    DESKTOP_TEST_ISSUES: Module-Desktop-Applications:17-SP5
    SDK_TEST_ISSUES: Development-Tools:17-SP5
    PCM_TEST_ISSUES: Public-Cloud:17-SP5
  onetime: true
```

> * `aggregate` - self explanatory, mapping containing all needed settings for aggregate schedule of given *product*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `aggregate` - self-explanatory mapping containing all needed settings for the aggregate schedule of a given *product*
```

> * `FLAVOR` - flavor used by schedule, can be only one per product, mandatory

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `FLAVOR` - flavor used by the schedule, can be only one per product, mandatory
```

* `archs` - list scheduled architectures, mandatory

> * `test_issues` - mandatory, contains mapping of `*_TEST_ISSUES`, which are used to decide which incidents to be scheduled in aggregate jobs. Values are `PRODUCT-IDENTIFICATION:VERSION`. `PRODUCT_IDENTIFICATION` as is defined in OBS/IBS, `VERSION` dtto, could use different versions for different `*_TEST_ISSUES`.  `OS_TEST_ISSUES` - implicit, always used by *os-autoinst-distri-opensuse*, contains identification of base product. All other contains modules, addons, extensions used in this aggreggate. First part of key name must be same (uppercase, os-autoinst-distri-opensuse wll convert it to lowercase) as addon,extension,module identification in `SCC_ADDONS` variable defined in job template inside openqa instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `test_issues` - mandatory, contains mapping of `*_TEST_ISSUES`, which are used to decide which incidents to be scheduled in aggregate jobs. Values are `PRODUCT-IDENTIFICATION:VERSION`. `PRODUCT_IDENTIFICATION` as is defined similarly in OBS/IBS, `VERSION`, could use different versions for different `*_TEST_ISSUES`.  `OS_TEST_ISSUES` - implicit, always used by *os-autoinst-distri-opensuse*, contains identification of base product. All others contain modules, add-ons, extensions used in this aggregate. First part of key name must be same (uppercase, os-autoinst-distri-opensuse will convert it to lowercase) as add-on,extension,module identification in `SCC_ADDONS` variable defined in job template inside openQA instance.
```

> * `onetime` - optional key, boolean.  By default qem-bot implies False. When used with True value it limits bot scheduling this aggregate only once per day.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `onetime` - optional key, boolean.  By default value is False. When set to True, it limits scheduling this aggregate only once per day.
```

  FLAVOR:
    Some-Incident-Flavor:
      archs:
        - x86_64
        - aarch64
      issues:
         BASE_TEST_ISSUES: Basesystem:17-SP5
         OS_TEST_ISSUES: Product-Linux:17-SP5
         SERVERAPP_TEST_ISSUES: Module-Server-Applications:17-SP5
         DESKTOP_TEST_ISSUES: Module-Desktop-Applications:17-SP5
         SDK_TEST_ISSUES: Development-Tools:17-SP5
         PCM_TEST_ISSUES: Public-Cloud:17-SP5
      required_issues:
         - PCM_TEST_ISSUES
         - BASE_TEST_ISSUES
      aggregate_job: false
      aggregate_check_true:
         - KEYONE
      aggregate_check_false:
         - KEYTWO
         - KEYTHREE
      override_priority: 100
      params_expand:
        FOO: foo
        BAR: bar
      packages:
        - pkgone
        - pkgtwo
      excluded_packages:
        - pkgthree
        - pkgfour
    Other-Incident-FLavor:
      ...
```

* `incidents` mapping contains all settings for incident schedule of product.
* `FLAVOR` mapping containing FLAVOR's and all settings needed for FLAVOR schedule. FLAVOR itself maps 1:1 to openQA's FLAVOR
* `archs` - list of scheduled architectures, mandatory
* `issues` - mandatory, same rules as `test_issues` of aggregate

> * `required_issues` - optional, contains list of  `issues` keys which must be part of Incident to be scheduled.  Without this key any incident containing any target will be scheduled in this FLAVOR.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `required_issues` - optional, contains list of  `issues` keys which must be part of Incident to be scheduled. Without this key any incident containing any target will be scheduled in this FLAVOR.
```

* `aggregate_job` - optional, boolean value, by default is `True`. When set to `False` it indicates this FLAVOR don't need aggregate job for approval.

> * `aggregate_check_true` and `aggregate_check_false` - optional, list of keywords, used only with `aggregate_job: false`. Conditions finely tunning need of Aggregate for approval. Keywords are settings keys scheduled for job. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `aggregate_check_true` and `aggregate_check_false` - optional, list of keywords, used only with `aggregate_job: false`. Conditions for finely tuning the need of Aggregate for approval. Keywords are settings keys scheduled for the job. 
```

> * `override_priority` - optional, interger. Overrides default priority of job. (default = 50, with modifiers for `Minimal`, EMU and staging Incidents)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `override_priority` - optional, interger. Overrides the default priority of the job. (default = 50, with modifiers for `Minimal`, EMU and staging Incidents)
```

> * `packages` - optional, list of package names (or first part of pkg name). Incident must contain package from this list to be scheduled into openQA

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `packages` - optional, list of package names (or first part of package name). An Incident must contain a package from this list to be scheduled into openQA
```

> * `exluded_packages` - optional, list of pacage names, opposite to `packages`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `excluded_packages` - optional, list of package names, opposite to `packages`
```

# Configuration format of qem-bot

> Configuration, in another way also called metadata of qem-bot is hold in yaml files with one file per "product". Additionaly, there is one special config file called `singlearch.yml` which contains a list of packages that exist only on single architecture.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Configuration, in another way also called metadata of qem-bot is hold in yaml files with one file per **product**. Additionaly, there is one special config file called `singlearch.yml` which contains a list of packages that exist only on single architecture.
```

Example of `singlearch.yaml`:

```yaml
- packageone
- packagetwo
- onlyppcle
```

> If a incident has package from this list, a job is automaticaly marked as without **aggregate**. That means the Incident can be approved without existing aggregate jobs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If an Incident has package from this list, a job is automatically marked as without **aggregate**. That means the Incident can be approved without existing aggregate jobs.
```

Other yaml files contain the definition of **product** and data either or both **aggregate** and **incidents**

## Structure of a product definition

> Contains unique identification of a product, common settings and `DISTRI` plus `VERSION` variables for openQA.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Contains unique identification of a **product**, common settings and `DISTRI` plus `VERSION` variables for openQA.
```

Example:

```yaml
product: leap155
settings:
  DISTRI: opensuse
  VERSION: '15.5'
  SOMETHING: 'something123'
  ELSE: 'ELSE123'
```

* `product` - mandatory and must be unique, no other config file can have same product. 
* `settings` - mandatory mapping containing `key` : `value` which are used directly in job schedule. From this the pairs `DISTRI` and `VERSION` are mandatory.

## Aggregate part of config

Used to schedule multiple Incidents in a product as one BUILD named **YYYYMMDD-{counter from 1}**. Jobs scheduled on this part of the config will have multiple vars `*_TEST_REPO` used to add Incident repositories. 

Example:

```yaml
 aggregate:
  FLAVOR: Shiny-New-Flavour
  archs:
    - aarch64
    - s390x
  test_issues:
    BASE_TEST_ISSUES: Basesystem:17-SP5
    OS_TEST_ISSUES: Product-Linux:17-SP5
    SERVERAPP_TEST_ISSUES: Module-Server-Applications:17-SP5
    DESKTOP_TEST_ISSUES: Module-Desktop-Applications:17-SP5
    SDK_TEST_ISSUES: Development-Tools:17-SP5
    PCM_TEST_ISSUES: Public-Cloud:17-SP5
  onetime: true
```

* `aggregate` - self-explanatory, mapping containing all needed settings for the aggregate schedule of a given *product*

> * `FLAVOR` - flavor used by the schedule, can be only once per product, mandatory

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `FLAVOR` - flavor used by the schedule, can be only once per **product**, mandatory
```

* `archs` - list scheduled architectures, mandatory

> * `test_issues` - mandatory, contains mapping of `*_TEST_ISSUES`, which are used to decide which incidents to be scheduled in aggregate jobs. Values are `PRODUCT-IDENTIFICATION:VERSION`. `PRODUCT_IDENTIFICATION` as is defined in OBS/IBS. `VERSION` dtto, could use different versions for different `*_TEST_ISSUES`.  `OS_TEST_ISSUES` - implicit, always used by *os-autoinst-distri-opensuse*, contain identification of the base product. All others contain modules, addons, extensions used in this aggregate. First part of key name must be same (uppercase, os-autoinst-distri-opensuse will convert it to lowercase) as addon, extension or module identification in `SCC_ADDONS` variable defined in job template inside openQA instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `test_issues` - mandatory, contains mapping of `*_TEST_ISSUES`, which are used to decide which Incidents to be scheduled in aggregate jobs. Values are `PRODUCT-IDENTIFICATION:VERSION`. `PRODUCT-IDENTIFICATION` as is defined in OBS/IBS. `VERSION` dtto, could use different versions for different `*_TEST_ISSUES`. 
* `OS_TEST_ISSUES` - implicit, always used by *os-autoinst-distri-opensuse*, contain identification of the base product. All others contain modules, addons, extensions used in this aggregate. First part of key name must be same (uppercase, *os-autoinst-distri-opensuse* will convert it to lowercase) as addon, extension or module identification in `SCC_ADDONS` variable defined in job template inside openQA instance.
```

         PCM_TEST_ISSUES: Public-Cloud:17-SP5
      required_issues:
         - PCM_TEST_ISSUES
         - BASE_TEST_ISSUES
      aggregate_job: false
      aggregate_check_true:
         - KEYONE
      aggregate_check_false:
         - KEYTWO
         - KEYTHREE
      override_priority: 100
      params_expand:
        FOO: foo
        BAR: bar
      packages:
        - pkgone
        - pkgtwo
      excluded_packages:
        - pkgthree
        - pkgfour
    Other-Incident-FLavor:
      ...
```

* `incidents` mapping contains all settings for incident schedule of a product.
* `FLAVOR` mapping containing FLAVORs and all settings needed for to schedule them. FLAVOR itself maps 1:1 to an openQA's FLAVOR
* `archs` - list of scheduled architectures, mandatory
* `issues` - mandatory, same rules as `test_issues` of aggregate
* `required_issues` - optional, contains list of `issues` keys which must be part of the Incident to be scheduled. Without this key any incident containing any target in `issues` will be scheduled in this FLAVOR.
* `aggregate_job` - optional, boolean value, by default is `True`. When set to `False` it indicates this FLAVOR doesn't need an aggregate job for approval.

> * `aggregate_check_true` and `aggregate_check_false` - optional, list of keywords, used only with `aggregate_job: false`. Conditions for finely tunning the need of the Aggregate jobs for approval. Keywords are settings keys scheduled used in job. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `aggregate_check_true` and `aggregate_check_false` - optional, list of keywords, used only with `aggregate_job: false`. Conditions for finely tuning the need of the aggregate jobs for approval. Keywords are settings keys scheduled used in job. 
```

> * `override_priority` - optional, interger. Overrides the default priority of the job. (default = 50, with modifiers for `*Minimal`, EMU and staging Incidents)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `override_priority` - optional, integer. Overrides the default priority of the job (default = 50, with modifiers for `*Minimal`, EMU and staging Incidents).
```

* `packages` - optional, list of package names (or first part of pkg name). Incident must contain package from this list to be scheduled into openQA

> * `excluded_packages` - optional, list of package names, opposite to `packages`. If the Incident contains package in this list, isn't scheduled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `excluded_packages` - optional, list of package names, opposite to `packages`. If the Incident contains package in this list, it isn't scheduled.
```

# Configuration format of qem-bot

> Configuration, in another way also called metadata of qem-bot is held in yaml files with one file per "product". Additionally, there is one special config file called `singlearch.yml` which contains a list of packages that exist only on a single architecture.

Reviewer 3: Since the configuration spans multiple files, maybe it would be a good idea to start this with a directory listing of these YAML files, before describing them individually in more detail. To get an overview of what's being described in the document.
```
|- singlearch.yaml
...
```

# Configuration format of qem-bot

Configuration, in another way also called metadata of qem-bot, is held in yaml files with one file per "product". Additionally, there is one special config file called `singlearch.yml` which contains a list of packages that exist only on a single architecture.

> Configuration usually spans over multiple files. And default location excepted from qem-bot is `/etc/openqabot/`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Configuration usually spans over multiple files. The default location accepted from qem-bot is `/etc/openqabot/`.
```

Reviewer 4: This wasn't addressed

```bash
/etc/openqabot ❯❯❯ tree                   
.                          
├── singlearch.yml               
├── leap154.yml                   
├── sles15sp3.yml        
├── micro53.yml          
...
```

> Example of `singlearch.yaml`:

Reviewer 3: This says `.yaml` and the two mentions above say `.yml`. Do both extensions work? Then it's probably worth mentioning that as well.

Reviewer 3: This was marked as resolved, but i don't see anything in the docs about it.

Author: ahh, forgot commit. Thx for spotting

Example:

```yaml
product: leap155
settings:
  DISTRI: opensuse
  VERSION: '15.5'
  SOMETHING: 'something123'
  ELSE: 'ELSE123'
```

* `product` - mandatory and must be unique, no other config file can have the same product. 
* `settings` - mandatory mapping containing `key` : `value` which are used directly in job schedule. From this the pairs `DISTRI` and `VERSION` are mandatory.

## Aggregate part of the config

Used to schedule multiple Incidents in a product as one BUILD named **YYYYMMDD-{counter from 1}**. Jobs scheduled on this part of the config will have multiple vars `*_TEST_REPO` used to add Incident repositories. 

Example:

```yaml
 aggregate:
  FLAVOR: Shiny-New-Flavour
  archs:
    - aarch64
    - s390x
  test_issues:
    BASE_TEST_ISSUES: Basesystem:17-SP5
    OS_TEST_ISSUES: Product-Linux:17-SP5
    SERVERAPP_TEST_ISSUES: Module-Server-Applications:17-SP5
    DESKTOP_TEST_ISSUES: Module-Desktop-Applications:17-SP5
    SDK_TEST_ISSUES: Development-Tools:17-SP5
    PCM_TEST_ISSUES: Public-Cloud:17-SP5
  onetime: true
```

* `aggregate` - self-explanatory, mapping containing all needed settings for the aggregate schedule of a given *product*

> * `FLAVOR` - flavour used by the schedule, can be only once per product, mandatory

Reviewer 4: I would add the `mandatory` either at the beginning or at the end of the descriptions, but consistently

Reviewer 4: This wasn't addressed.
What I mean is: for all items, either put the "mandatory" at the beginning of the description, or at the end. Same with optional, I would say.
It can be a bit confusing to have it sometimes at the start and sometimes at the end.

* `archs` - list scheduled architectures, mandatory

> * `test_issues` - mandatory, contains a mapping of `*_TEST_ISSUES`, which are used to decide which Incidents to be scheduled in aggregate jobs. Values are `PRODUCT-IDENTIFICATION:VERSION`. `PRODUCT-IDENTIFICATION` as defined in OBS/IBS. `VERSION` dtto, could use different versions for different `*_TEST_ISSUES`.

Reviewer 4: "dtto"?

Reviewer: Likely "ditto" - which means "I'm bragging with my knowledge of antiquated Latin words". So my suggestion was to use "similarly" instead.

>   * `OS_TEST_ISSUES` variable is implicit, always used by *os-autoinst-distri-opensuse*, contain identification of the base product.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  * `OS_TEST_ISSUES` variable is implicit, always used by *os-autoinst-distri-opensuse*, contains identification of the base product.
```

## Incidents part of the config

Used to schedule jobs per one Incident. Scheduled jobs will have BUILD **:INCIDENT_NR:shortest_package_name**. All needed links to scheduled incident repositories are in the `INCIDENT_REPO` variable.

Example:

```yaml
incidents:
  FLAVOR:
    Some-Incident-Flavor:
      archs:
        - x86_64
        - aarch64
      issues:
         BASE_TEST_ISSUES: Basesystem:17-SP5
         OS_TEST_ISSUES: Product-Linux:17-SP5
         SERVERAPP_TEST_ISSUES: Module-Server-Applications:17-SP5
         DESKTOP_TEST_ISSUES: Module-Desktop-Applications:17-SP5
         SDK_TEST_ISSUES: Development-Tools:17-SP5
         PCM_TEST_ISSUES: Public-Cloud:17-SP5
      required_issues:
         - PCM_TEST_ISSUES
         - BASE_TEST_ISSUES
      aggregate_job: false
      aggregate_check_true:
         - KEYONE
      aggregate_check_false:
         - KEYTWO
         - KEYTHREE
      override_priority: 100
      params_expand:
        FOO: foo
        BAR: bar
      packages:
        - pkgone
        - pkgtwo
      excluded_packages:
        - pkgthree
        - pkgfour
    Other-Incident-FLavor:
      ...
```

> * `incidents` mapping contains all settings for an incident schedule of a product.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* `incidents` mapping containing all settings for an incident schedule of a product.
```

Reviewer 4: This wasn't addressed.
Here you use `mapping contains`, and directly below you use `mapping containing`.

* `FLAVOR` mapping containing FLAVORs and all settings needed to schedule them. FLAVOR itself maps 1:1 to an openQA's FLAVOR
* `archs` - list of scheduled architectures, mandatory
* `issues` - mandatory, same rules as `test_issues` of aggregate
* `required_issues` - optional, contains a list of `issues` keys which must be part of the Incident to be scheduled. Without this key, any incident containing any target in `issues` will be scheduled in this FLAVOR.

> * `aggregate_job` - optional, boolean value, by default is `True`. When set to `False` it indicates this FLAVOR doesn't need an aggregate job for approval.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* `aggregate_job` - optional, boolean value, by default is `true`. When set to `false` it indicates this FLAVOR doesn't need an aggregate job for approval.
```
We should use the canonical YAML boolean values

Author: really ? for YAML 1.1  - is canonical YAML boolean value `y` or `n` ..and parserve we using -> PyYAML is YAML 1.1. 

https://yaml.org/type/bool.html

Reviewer 4: Ah right, it is `y|n` for YAML 1.1, but it is a good practice to use `true|false` like in YAML 1.2 already.

> * `aggregate_check_true` and `aggregate_check_false` - optional, list of keywords, used only with `aggregate_job: false`. Conditions for finely tuning the need of the Aggregate jobs for approval. Keywords are settings keys scheduled used in a job.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* `aggregate_check_true` and `aggregate_check_false` - optional, list of keywords, used only with `aggregate_job: false`. Conditions for fine tuning the need of the Aggregate jobs for approval. Keywords are settings keys scheduled used in a job.
```
And I don't understand the last sentence.
